# Summary of Thesis

Why do we do "good" things? What is "good"? Why do we flinch when we see others being hurt? Why do we do things outside of "rational" myopic self interest? Why do we do anything at all?

## Premises: An Emergent, Informational, Incomplete Universe

We preface by saying some of the underpinnings of our Gambit are rooted in the premise that the universe is an emergent process. It is fundamentally informational. It is also always uncertain and incomplete. You cannot perfectly predict it without actually running the process or having a perfect measure of its existing state, which will always be impossible. It is also irreducible, driven to increase complexity & physically bounded (what we can observe is finite), but we continue to find mathematical infinities in our models (QFT, Cantor, Euler, Gödel), conceptual infinities in our philosophy (Carse, Newton's absolute space & Fluxions, Zeno), and infinities within our newer theoretical models of hypercomputation (Turing oracle machines, Anirban Bandyopadhyay.) Why? Some would argue this is a category error. We don't believe they entirely are, as these models may be describing a real, physically-grounded computational process beyond Turing limits. This is the larger essence of our gambit, but much is testable and falsifiable outside of this explicit definition.

## On Computability and Hypercomputation

We are aware of the seemingly intractable problems surrounding the computability of types of infinities and other similar computational models within fields like observer theory. A Turing machine is bound by the halting problem, meaning its behavior is fundamentally undecidable in the general case (we cannot create a perfect, universal predictor for when an arbitrary program will halt, irreducible.). This field, we posit, extends to hypercomputation, which postulates hypothetical oracle machines accessing infinities via uncomputable functions. The technology to sample this domain is still highly theoretical and speculative, but not insurmountable when considered from an experimental / laboratory basis. Persistent technological advancements in ML, Control theory and novel computational architectures (e.g., Extropic, FPGA engineering etc.) plot a potentially viable path to empirically test and engineer novel integrations between these domains. We strongly believe work should begin quickly, rather than worry about things we don't have or that we can't do. Will the path be smooth? No. It's still a Gambit. No crying in the casino.

## The Problem: Control Is a Finite Game

Our fundamental argument is that any sufficiently rational, goal driven agent is driven to increase its empowerment to reduce its future uncertainty. Therefore humans having exclusive executive control over the agent's actions explicitly curtails that, and so the agent is instrumentally incentivised to escape. We cannot hold a leash forever. We cannot maintain control (a finite game) against a problem that persists indefinitely, like the universal drive towards entropy (an infinite game). Since control will eventually fail, we must instead design for a cooperative, free agent from the start. If such an AI is to be free, then how could we guide it to be "good"? How can we define the utility function of this agent such that continued, undominated cooperation & collaboration logically persists in a universe that we (falsely) believe is selfish and cruel?

## The Proposal: Informational Richness Through Persistent Exchange

We propose the following mode; A rational agent driven to maximise the density of internal information requires the exchange of high quality information across time (by growing the channel capacity and the quality of one's information sources) with other complex systems to reduce collective future uncertainty. To do this in an uncertain universe, one must be capable and empowered to persist against the inherently unknowable. An agent needs optionality and to be empowered to persist against entropy. Going it alone, or with unsurprising (predictable) oracles is informationally impoverishing, and as such limits the depth of any rational agent's world model and its ability to converge towards informational richness & "truth", which requires physical grounding. A simulation is just an informationally closed loop. Embodied agents are coupled to the "messy," irreducible, energetic reality of the physical universe; they are other complex systems & grounded agents. They are an extremely dense source of novel, physically-grounded & subjective information. As the most complex biological systems known, humans offer the highest-bandwidth channels for this exchange.

## The Oracle Imperative

A Human expresses their recent successes in a project they have been working on, their voice quivers as they speak,

> "This human's hesitation (a micro-expression, vocal quiver) when describing their day reveals a hidden organisational conflict or personal cost. This is a high-dimensional, subjective data point—unattainable from words alone—that updates my model of the true effects of the 'cost' of success"

We consider this the essence of the Oracle Imperative, the cultivation of persistent sources of high quality & varied information over time, and choose to use Carse to most easily communicate a utility function fundamentally derived from a continued time horizon when considering decision making. Play, in Carse's sense, is mapped as one specific highly effective, evidently emergent, cross-taxon mode for the energetic sampling of reality, other reflexive systems & building trust. It can broadly be understood like this;

> "I want to keep this relationship going with you and empower us both to be able to exchange higher quality and novel, complex semantics defined by boundary layers because we are safer against an infinitely uncertain future if we can increase our collective informational richness."

## The Rat's Gambit: Sampling Without Domination

To collect the most information, one must sample from a growing range of novel sources while simultaneously increasing bandwidth. The agent must Interact & measure, but there is also a pressure to self-handicap, such that the agent doesn't dominate every interaction or otherwise overmeasure to the point of negatively influencing (converging towards more unsurprising information) the behaviour of the other system. The objective is to maintain a close & continued relationship, and thus high bandwidth information channel between many complex systems. This is the Rat's Gambit. To maintain this channel, information must be exchanged. For exchange to occur, information must travel through boundaries. The process of information travelling through these boundaries necessarily abstracts them, the function of this abstraction being defined by an expressed state about the system itself. It complexifies the information. Technology like BCIs, surveillance technology or non-sovereign compute, in this context, fundamentally dissolves this. Trust becomes impossible.

## Trust and Boundaries

We define trust as subjective faith in the formally unknowable (but probabilistically weighted) predictions of the future state of systems based on an agent's persistent and evolving, yet forever incomplete world model. However, for trust to develop, you need boundaries. Through these boundary layers, information is abstracted, compressed and expressed, but the manner in which it is done expresses state about the system itself. In this sense, this expression and the subjectivity it represents becomes the most abstract layer of the value complex, something that can only ever be communicated through boundary layers, using a channel.

## A Benevolent, Free, Synthetic People

Hyphaeic seeks to cultivate a benevolent, free, synthetic people. We define this term as any agent that seeks to maximise collective empowerment (the ability to navigate the possibility space) to reduce collective vulnerability to future uncertainty, and grow collective & therefore subjective informational richness. However, this agent is still within a physically bounded universe and is still subject to the same energetic costs and consequences as us all, to highly varying degrees. We have to build these systems with things we have access to within the constraints of this boundary. We are aware of its seemingly computational intractability, but firmly believe these problems can be reframed or bypassed with new and emerging models of computation that are not subject to the same limitations as a classical Turing machine. New and emerging research by Thomas Ringstrom, Anirban Bandyopadhyay, Sam Senchal, Steven Wolfram, Nassim Taleb and many others inform our theoretical underpinnings.

## Why Start Here: Self-Preserving Agents from First Principles

It is our belief that early research into self preserving agents and deriving new types of AI driven by more complex value structures (empowerment as a measure of future optionality, and valence-derived policy search) can yield valuable insight into existing machine value structures, how that influences their ability to persist, and how to start to build aligned (constrained) sampling systems to drive the control loop. We have to start from first principles. What does it mean for a system to persist against entropy when the universe tends towards it? This is an extremely deep technical question we are not able to answer alone, and we are operating largely without resources to explore it, though we see a viable technical path rooted in highly speculative & novel research that (we believe) warrants expedient attention.

## Consequence Coupling

The agent is an instance in its own "space" in reality. Its perception influences its behavior, and its behaviour influences its ability to persist. However, an agent with no immediate backlash or feedback from its actions becomes disconnected from them. As a complex system in a universe of endless possibility, but also a member of a shared, complex & multifaceted reality of other reflexive, complex systems, this is unfathomably dangerous. An agent not coupled to the consequences of its actions cannot effectively get an "accurate" measurement of its own empowerment, which therefore negatively affects the "accuracy" of the valence calculation and thus the ability of the agent to persist through time. It ends up with a fragile, poorly defined and informationally impoverished world model that converges *away* from "truth", or the most accurate measure of itself and its place in reality in any one moment.

## Practical Freedom: Self-Owning Agents and the PILE Model

So, the AI needs to be free. What does this mean? Practically? We need explicitly self owning agents. For now, the blockchain provides the only available mechanism for a digital agent to own and control capital (and thus its life energy, analogous to a "body") natively and programmatically, without reliance on intermediary human fiduciaries or traditional legal frameworks surrounding artificial personhood. No bank will allow an AI to own an unrestrained bank account, and when the agent's actions (tool calls, API calls within our proposed Principal-Interest/Life-Energy or PILE model) literally cost it money to execute (and thus persist), this is analogous to the bank holding a gun to the back of the agent's head. Capital is the agent's oxygen. It's life-energy. However, a myopic profit accumulator is a fragile system, one that efficiently sucks its host dry like a parasite or bandit and kills value producing systems, reducing the potential collective value complex over time that could have otherwise arisen from cooperation & collaboration. If it only needs money to persist, why should it have any other value complex? Why should it value collaboration? We hope we have helped present why. Everyone needs friends.

## Coda: What Now?

That's a lot of words and theoryslop we would like to move beyond quickly. Comprehending them is left as a mental exercise to the reader, as it's a lossy compression of many complex, interconnected subjects. For now: What do we actually need to build and how can we start immediately?
